===== PAGE 1 (obj 540) =====
The development of velum coordination in children: a
real-time MRI study
Sean Foley
University of Southern California
seanfole@usc.edu
February 15, 2026
Abstract
This study examines the development of velum coordination in American English speaking
children using real-time MRI. We focus specifically on three aspects of velum coordination
|timing, displacement, and duration, as a function of the syllable positions of the nasal, i.e.
onset, coda, or juncture geminate positions. It is found that the two oldest speakers, aged 15,
generally show clear distinctions along these dimensions depending on the syllable position of
the nasal and that they pattern closely with findings from adults. The younger speakers, ages
5-14, do not consistently distinguish nasals by syllable position along these dimensions. For
timing, all younger speakers regularly employed very early velum lowering. These findings are
discussed with respect to previous theories on the development of coordination and coupling
modes in speech production, particularly within complex segments.
1 Introduction
Speech production necessitates the coordination of various articulators to form constrictions in
the vocal tract. Mastering this coordination is a fundamental challenge in speech development,
particularly given that the child learner must cope with a growing vocal tract (McGowan et al.,
2004). Crucially, articulatory coordination entails coordination in both space and time, and while
spatiotemporal aspects of coordination, namely coordination or gestural overlap, have received con-
siderable attention in prior work on speech development (Rubertus and Noiray, 2018; Cychosz et al.,
2021), articulatory timing is notably less well researched. The current study aims to address this
considerable gap by looking at articulatory timing specifically, among other aspects of articulatory
coordination.
Coordination within segments, such as in complex segments, often requires coordinating multiple
constrictions in a stable manner that is distinct from coordinating across segments (Shaw et al.,
2021). Nasal consonants are a prime example of this as they require both the lowering of the velum
and the raising of the tongue tip (TT). Previous work on adults has demonstrated that the timing
of these two gestures can vary cross-linguistically (Proctor et al., 2012), depending on the syllable
position of the nasal (Krakow, 1999; Byrd et al., 2009) and across prosodic conditions (Proctor
et al., 2012). The development of coordination in complex segments such as nasals is severely
understudied.
The current study investigates velum coordination in American English speaking children using
real-time MRI (rtMRI). This study represents one of the first studies to investigate articulatory
timing in children, particularly by means of rtMRI. Nasals are a viable case study in examining
articulatory coordination given that they involve both a velum lowering gesture and tongue tip
raising gesture. While clear adult patterns in velum coordination have been established, how
these patterns develop in children is largely a mystery. Indeed, there have been studies on nasal
coarticulation in children using acoustic measures, but this does not aord the same degree of clarity
oered by rtMRI in illuminating how children coordinate the velum in speech.
1

===== PAGE 2 (obj 1) =====
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 dives deeper into the previous literature
on articulatory coordination, coupling modes, and speech development with reference to nasals
specifically and states the research questions and hypotheses of the current study. Section 2 outlines
the methodology employed in the current study, giving an overview of the equipment and analysis
used. Section 3 discusses the results of the study, dividing them into results concerning velum
timing, displacement, duration, and the interaction between the three. Section 4 discusses the
implications of the result with respect to theories of articulatory coordination, coupling modes, and
development, limitations of the current study, and ways to extend the current work.
1.1 Articulatory coordination in nasals & complex segments
Nasal consonants require both the formation of an oral constriction and a lowering of the velum
to allow airow through the nasal cavity. Unlike other articulators that typically involve muscular
activation to initiate movement towards its speech production goal, it is primarily inactivation
of the levator veli palatini that results in velum lowering during nasals (Bell-Berti, 1993; Zajac,
2015). Nasal breathing with a lowered velum position is also typical during rest. Thus, gestural
coordination in nasal consonants entails coordinating inactivation of the levator veli palatini and
activation of the lingual and mandibular musculature involved in the formation of a TT constriction.
We postulate that this facts plays a critical role in the development of velum coordination in nasal
consonants.
The timing of the oral and velum gestures has been found to vary cross-linguistically (Proctor
et al., 2012; Krakow, 1999), depending on the syllable position of the nasal (Krakow, 1989, 1999;
Byrd et al., 2009; Oh, 2021), and across prosodic conditions (Byrd et al., 2009; Proctor et al.,
2012). In a comparison of French and English, Proctor et al. (2012) found velum-TT timing to be
dierent between French nasal vowels and consonants, with velum loweing preceding vowel target
achievement in nasal vowels, a pattern that English patterns more closely with. Lag between velum
and TT onset has been found to vary between onset and coda nasals in American English (Krakow,
1989, 1999; Byrd et al., 2009), but not so for Korean nasals, with syllable position eects impacting
the lag between velum raising and TT onset instead (Oh, 2021).
Focusing on American English, nasals have been shown to exhibit clear timing patterns in adult
speech dependent on the syllable position of the nasal. In onsets, near synchronous timing of the
velum lowering and oral constriction gestures is observed, while for coda nasals the two gestures
asynchronously, with the velum lowering being initiated before the formation of the oral constriction
(Krakow, 1989, 1999; Byrd et al., 2009). The earliest study demonstrating this was Krakow (1989),
who employed a Velotrace to track the position of the velum during nasal sequences. Krakow (1989)
found that, during the production of /m/, lowering of the velum occurred well before the labial
constriction in coda /m/ and that for onset /m/ the timing was much more synchronous. These
results were later replicated in Byrd et al. (2009) using rtMRI and focused on the coronal nasal
/n/. These timing distinctions can be represented graphically using a gestural score, a gestural
activation matrix that has vocal tract organs on the y-axis and time on the x-axis, shown in Figure
1 for the words \nab" (left) and \ban" (right). Note that in \nab" the onset if the gestures for the
velum, TT, and tongue body all occur at the same time. In \ban", it can be seen that the onset
of the velum gesture occurs well before that of the TT, while the vowel gesture occurs before the
velum gesture.
In addition to the bimodal distribution in timing, there is also evidence that this bimodality
extends also to magnitude of the velum lowering. Generally, a lower velum position is found in coda
nasals (Krakow, 1999; Byrd et al., 2009; Blaylock et al., 2016). This has also been found in other
languages, e.g. Hindi (Henderson, 1984). Duration of the velum lowering gesture has also been
found to vary as a function of syllable position, with coda nasals having longer velum gestures than
onset nasals (?). In all, previous work has established that speakers of American English modulate
velum gestures in terms of timing, magnitude, and duration dependent on the syllable position of
the nasal.
Articulatory coordination in nasals is also relevant to previous work on the stability of coordi-
nation in complex segments, i.e. segments involving multiple constrictions. It has been proposed
that the crucial distinction between complex segments and segment sequences is the stability of
2

===== PAGE 3 (obj 3) =====
their coordination (Byrd, 1996; Shaw et al., 2021). For example, Shaw et al. (2021) found that
onset lag between the two gestures in palatalized consonants in Russian did not vary considerably
as a function of varying gestural duration, while similar labial-palatal sequences in English did. In
Hausa, Oh et al. (2024) discovered that stability in onset lag between the larynx and oral gestures
is critical in distinguishing implosives and their pulmonic counterparts, with implosives displaying
greater stability in this dimension. Similarly, Korean nasals have been found to have greater sta-
bility in the lag between velum target achievement and TT raising than onset lag between the two
gestures, suggesting the former is part of goal in Korean nasal production (Oh, 2021). While timing
patterns have been investigated in American English nasals, the stability of these patterns has not,
and as such, it is unknown what temporal relation between the velum and TT exhibits stability in
these segments.Tract VariablesVelumTongue TipTongue BodyLip ApertureGlottiswidealveolar closedpharyngeal widebilabial closed TimeTract VariablesVelumTongue TipTongue BodyLip ApertureGlottiswidealveolar closedpharyngeal widebilabial closed TimeFigure 1: Gestural scores for word `nab' (left) and `ban' (right).
1.2 Development of articulatory coordination & nasals
A particularly robust findings from studies on the development of articulatory coordination is that
children are more variable or less stable in their coordination than adults (Green et al., 2000; Smith
and Zelaznik, 2004; Green and Nip, 2010; Terband et al., 2011). In one of the most extensive
studies to date, Smith and Zelaznik (2004) looked at variability in lip aperture across 180 children
and adults using a point tracking based method. They found the general trend that very young
children exhibited much higher variability than adults, but that even kids aged 14 show considerably
more variability than young adults. A particularly striking additional finding was the plateau in
variability roughly between the ages 6-12, where little to no change in variability was observed across
subjects. In some cases, the subjects aged 12 showed more variability than their much younger
counterparts. There is also a great deal of evidence that children coarticulate more than adults
(???Abakarova et al., 2022), though this finding is not always replicated (Noiray et al., 2013).
A number of studies have investigated velopharyngeal function and nasal coarticulation in chil-
dren (Flege, 1988; Ha and Kuehn, 2006). Acoustic-perceptual studies have suggested that some
of the early infant vocalizations are produced with a lowered velum and that infants are nasal
breathers (Zajac, 2015). This likely stems from the close proximity of the epiglottis to the velum in
infancy, which later separate as the larynx descends (Zajac, 2015). Changes in the velopharyngeal
region during development can also impact velum action during speech. Lymphoid tissue in the
nasopharynx, termed the adenoids, grow on the rear pharyngeal wall around age 2 and have been
speculated to impact velum closure and levator veli palatini activation, given that for some children
velum closure may involve velar-adenoidal contact rather than pharyngeal contact (Zajac, 2015;
Perry et al., 2017). In early adolescence, atrophy of the adenoids forces adjustment of the velum
raising gesture, given changes to the posterior region with which velum contact may previously
have been made (Zajac, 2015).
While one early study on anticipatory nasal coarticulation in children found that children have
less nasalization than adults (), more studies since then have found either no dierence between
3

===== PAGE 4 (obj 5) =====
adults and children or that children have more nasalization (Flege, 1988; Leeper et al., 1998; Ha and
Kuehn, 2006). Flege (1988) investigated anticipatory and carryover nasalization on the vowel in dn
and nd contexts. They found that children between the ages 5-10 did not dier significantly in their
vowel nasalization from adults in these two contexts. The authors go on to suggest that early velum
lowering in final nasals may require less eort than more rapid velum lowering closer to the onset
of the oral constriction. Ease of eort was also argued to explain earlier velum lowering in children
with cleft palate (Ha et al., 2004; Ha and Kuehn, 2006), with the authors going on to suggest that
perhaps less nasalization is associated with the development of speech motor control. A crucial
shortcoming of this previous work is that it has ignored the larger context concerning velum timing
patterns employed in adult speech. Specifically, this work has not considered variations in velum
timing due to dierent syllable positions of the nasal. Often the focus has been on anticipatory
eects, i.e. coda nasals only, or on nasals in VCV sequences with ambiguous syllabification. For
example, while Flege (1988) did include onset and coda nasal conditions, they only looked at
nasalization on vowels in the same word as the nasal, so any potential eects preceding the vowel
in the nd context were ignored.
To our knowledge, no previous study has investigated articulatory timing in children. While
some studies have carried out acoustic experiments that can be used to infer the timing of articula-
tory actions (Flege, 1988; Ha and Kuehn, 2006; Howson and Redford, 2021), no study has actually
quantified the timing of one articulatory event relative to another with articulatory data from chil-
dren. The current study is then the first study to investigate articulatory timing in children, and
one of the first studies to employ rtMRI to study child speech production. 200 1000100200Early VelumCodaOnset 200 1000100200Synchronous 200 1000100200Early TTOnset Lag (ms)Figure 2: Three hypothetical starting points for the development of velum-TT timing as a function
of the syllable position of the nasal. Negative values indicate the velum precedes the TT, zero
indicates perfect synchrony, and positive values indicate the TT precedes the velum.
1.3 Research questions & predictions
In this study, we investigated three primary research questions regarding the development of velum
coordination in American English nasals:
1. What velum timing strategy is employed by child speakers of American English in the pro-
duction of nasals?
2. How do child speakers of American English modulate velum gesture magnitude and duration
as a function of the syllable position of the nasal?
3. What timing relation between the TT and velum is stable in American English nasals and at
what age do children exhibit this stability?
In regard to Q1, we make the basic assumption that younger children start out with a single
timing strategy. That is, rather than exhibiting the bimodal timing pattern of adults, the child
timing distributions are unimodal, regardless of the syllable position of the nasal. This follows from
the evidence showing that the timing patterns are language-specific and must therefore be learned
through experience (Cychosz et al., 2021). This premise does not necessarily assume that children
4

===== PAGE 5 (obj 7) =====
are coordinating the velum and TT, given that it is possible that they start out not coordinating
the two gestures. The question of stability (Q3) addresses this. Following the uniform timing
assumption, theoretically there are three possible timing patterns, visualized in Figure 2. These
include early velum lowering, synchronous timing, or early raising of the TT. We rule out early
TT raising given that such a timing pattern is not present in the input and that no previous
work motivates this possibility. This leaves two competing hypotheses: early velum lowering or
synchronous timing.
The synchronous timing hypothesis has been predicted by work within the coupled-oscillator
framework. Specifically, it has been suggested that the in-phase mode (synchronous timing) is more
readily available and more stable and that children have learned this mode during babbling, given
the universal frequency of CV syllables (Goldstein et al., 2006; Nam et al., 2009). While these
predictions were primarily made with respect to CV timing and coordination, the same coupling
modes have been proposed to underlie coordination in complex segments (Byrd, 1996; Byrd et al.,
2009). Kent (1983) also suggested that child speech is more likely to exhibit synchronous timing
patterns than adults. Both propositions would suggest that children start out producing all complex
segments with near synchronous timing among their respective gestures and that asynchronous
timing emerges later in codas. This view is also supported by work showing that children acquire
coda complex segments later than onsets (Lin and Demuth, 2015).
The early velum lowering hypothesis can be motivated by limited previous experimental work
and aspects of velopharyngeal function. As noted above, both Ha and Kuehn (2006) and Flege
(1988) found that children ages 4-10 exhibited adult-like degrees of vowel nasalization preceding
coda nasals. This would indicate early velum lowering for coda nasals and, given our assumption of
uniform timing, hints at early velum lowering as the strategy employed by children. One must also
consider that velum lowering entails inactivation of the levator veli palatini and that the resting
state of the velum is in its lowered position (Bell-Berti, 1993; Zajac, 2015). Given knowledge of the
upcoming nasal, to time the velum to be near synchronous with the TT gesture requires inhibition
of velum lowering. From this perspective, lowering the velum early may simply be easier for the
child learner than maintaining activation of the levator veli palatini and coordinating its relaxation
with TT raising. Similarly, it has been argued that earlier velum lowering in children with cleft
palate may be due to eort minimization (Ha and Kuehn, 2006). The role of inhibition was also
proposed by Howson and Redford (2021) for the acquisition of articulatory coordination in liquids.
They argue that children produce early tongue body retraction in /l/ and /r/ due to a lack of
inhibition of anticipatory tongue body constrictions for upcoming vowels.
For Q2, recall above that previous work has demonstrated that adults also show a bimodal
pattern in velum magnitude and duration, dependent on the syllable position of the nasal. Onset
nasals have shorter durations and lesser magnitude than coda nasals. Similar with timing, we
assume that this pattern is language-specific and must be learned. Therefore, as with timing, is
it predicted that younger children do not make distinctions in velum magnitude or duration when
varying the nasal syllable position, but rather they adopt a global strategy that is employed across
the board.
Q3 addresses not only a question of development but also of timing stability in American English
nasals more generally. Although previous work has established timing patterns in adult productions
on American English nasals, they did not investigate the stability of these patterns (Krakow, 1989,
1999; Byrd et al., 2009). Therefore, it is unknown what sort of timing relation is stable among the
velum and TT in the production of nasals for this language. Work on palatalized consonants in
Russian showed onset lag to be stable (Shaw et al., 2021), while for Korean nasals it was shown that
velum target to TT onset lag was more stable than onset lag (Oh, 2021). In terms of developmental
patterns, given the robust evidence that children are more variable in their speech motor skills
(Green et al., 2000; Smith and Zelaznik, 2004), we predict that younger speakers will display less
stability in the timing relations between the velum and TT. This also leaves open the possibility
that younger speakers are not yet coordinating the velum and TT, but rather implementing an
independent velum timing strategy. Concretely, this could involve early velum lowering or near
synchronous timing on the one hand, but variability in the velum-TT timing relationship as a
function of varying velum magnitude or duration on the other.
5

===== PAGE 6 (obj 9) =====
2 Method
2.1 Subjects
A total of seven subjects took part in the study, all of whom were female. Subject ages can be seen
in Table 1 and range from 5-15 years old. All subjects were monolingual American English speakers
and reported no history of hearing or speech disorders. The subjects include three pairs of siblings
and eorts were made to have each sibling complete the study independently. Specifically, the non-
participating sibling wore noise-canceling headphones while the participating sibling completed the
familiarization task and MRI scan. All subjects were recruited from the greater Los Angeles area
and IRB approval was granted for the study. One speaker was excluded from the study due to
two reasons. First, the speaker had silver crowns which produced an artifact in the MRI video
that greatly obscured the TT and lowered the resolution of the rest of the image, making analysis
dicult. Second, the speaker had considerable head movement which also made analysis dicult
as it relied on fixed region-based analysis that is only accurate if head movement is minimal.ID Age SexSpk5 5 F
Spk8 8 F
Spk11a 11 F
Spk11b 11 F
Spk14 14 F
Spk15a 15 F
Spk15b 15 FTable 1: Subjects in the current study with their age and sex. Subject IDs assigned based on age.
2.2 Stimuli
The stimuli used in the study were adapted from Byrd et al. (2009) (Table 1). Given that Byrd
et al. (2009) had adult subjects, this allows for direct comparison of the results with child subjects
to adults presented with similar stimuli. Specifically, the stimuli in Byrd et al. (2009) consisted of
singleton nasals in onset, coda or juncture geminate position within a two-word phrase. The onset
and coda positions are the primary comparison being made for velum timing, while the juncture
geminate items create another context, with the possibility of the geminate patterning with either
onset or coda nasals. In addition to the syllable conditions, labial and alveolar frames are used to
vary the surrounding context of the target nasals. In the both cases, the nasal is surrounded by
the vowel [oU] and then either a labial or alveolar. The one exception to this is the items where
the second word is \OK", which would have a velar to the right. The use of the vowel [oU] is to
induce jaw lowering and mouth opening, so as to more easily identify the oral constrictions during
the target nasals. In total, there are 6 target items.
Stimuli were presented with pictures that match the target phrase. For example, the pictures
for the phrase \bow no" can be seen in Figure 3. Each set of pictures was chosen so as to be
age appropriate and all were taken from open source image websites. Each target item was re-
peated ten times, for a total of 60 spoken items. These items were randomized and blocked within
singleton/cluster groups. Subjects were familiarized with the six pictures and the carrier phrases
beforehand. The target words were elicited using the pictures and subjects were instructed to say
the target word if they said a dierent word.
2.3 Data collection
The vocal tract of the speakers was imaged in midsagittal orientation using a 0.55T MRI scanner
with a custom upper airway receiver coil (Mu~noz et al., 2023), with a reconstructed frame rate
of 99 frames/sec (See Kumar et al. (2024) for details). Audio was collected at 16 kHz. All data
was acquired at the USC Dynamic Imaging Science Center. Subjects lied prone within the MRI
6

===== PAGE 7 (obj 13) =====
Figure 3: Pictures used for the target phrase \bow no". Subjects were shown this image and were
also cued to repeat after the experimenter who produced the target phrase in a carrier phrase. For
these pictures, the subject would hear and repeat \I can type bow no for you".Syllable Position Labial frame Alveolar frame
I can typefor you I can writeto youonset bow no toe note
coda bone oh tone oat
geminate bone no tone noteTable 2: Target phrases containing singleton nasals where labial and alveolar frames surround the
target nasal with either a labial or alveolar consonant.
scanner with their head placed within the speech coil. Headphones were worn by all subjects to
lessen the noise from the scanner and these also acted as headphones through which they could hear
the experimenter. The picture stimuli were presented to subjects via a television placed behind the
scanner and a mirror was placed above the subjects face to allow them to view the television. It
was confirmed for each subject that they had a full view of the television through the mirror and
adjustments were made to ensure this.
The general procedure involved two parts: 1) familiarization of the stimuli; 2) the MRI scan.
During the familiarization task participants were all shown the pictures to be presented during the
scan and the target phrases were elicited. In cases where the speaker produces a word that diverges
from the target, they were instructed to produce the target when seeing a particular image. All ten
images were gone through with participants at least twice. Following presentation of the images, the
participants were introduced to the repeat-after-me paradigm and were instructed to repeat after
the experimenter and to use the images as cues to the words spoken. Each subject was instructed
through multiple examples before being tested on several further examples without instruction.
Each scan began with both an audio test, to ensure the subject's audio volume is sucient to
be captured by the microphone, and a hearing test to ensure subjects could hear the experimenter
directions and cues. Each scan lasted roughly 30 seconds and consisted of four target sentences,
giving a total of 15 scans per subject for the full stimuli with 10 repetitions. In cases where subjects
made errors, only errors within the target phrase itself resulted in a repetition of that item. Errors
in the carrier phrase, e.g. substituting \to" for \for" or vice versa, did not result in a repetition of
that item.
7

===== PAGE 8 (obj 17) =====
2.4 Data Analysis
2.4.1 Tracking velum and TT kinematics
Gestural landmarks for the velum lowering and oral constriction formation (onset, target, and
release) were determined using region-of-interest (ROI) analysis. ROI analysis is commonly used in
image analysis methods for rtMRI and has been used in a range of studies (Lammert et al., 2010;
Proctor et al., 2011; Oh et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022). Velum lowering movement was analyzed using
the approach detailed in Carignan et al. (2021). First, triangular vocal tract regions-of-interest
(ROI) were defined for the velum per-speaker, using both anatomical landmarks and observation
of the resting state during nasal breathing (See Figure ??). The use of triangular ROIs allows for
minimizing intrusion of the tongue (Oh et al., 2021; Oh, 2021). The horizontal dimension stretches
from the edge of the posterior nasal spine to the rear pharyngeal wall or the edge of the adenoid
glands1. The vertical length was defined based on the lowest point of the velum during rest.
Pixels within these defined regions across all files were submitted to a principle component
analysis (PCA). From this trained PCA model, the loadings from the first principle component
(PC1) for each frame generate a 1D timeseries of velum lowering/raising with a sampling rate of
99 Hz (See Figure 5). Given that variation in velum movement primarily exists along dimensions
of lowering/raising, PC1 can be said to be the component that best captures this dimension of
variation. On average, PC1 captures % of variance across speakers, with a standard deviation of. Following Carignan et al. (2021), PC1 loadings were scaled within (0, 1) based on the maximum
and minimum loading across all files per speaker. The loadings then represent a proportion the
total range of velum movement. Given that the sign of the PC1 loadings is arbitrary per-speaker,
the sign of the loadings was ipped so that positive values correspond to greater velum lowering.
This was determined manually per-speaker by inspecting the timeseries in MVIEWRT (Proctor
et al., 2011).
ROIs were also defined independently per-speaker for the TT. Circular ROIs were defined by
observing TT constrictions during the target nasals, such that the anterior edge contains the area of
the alveolar ridge where such constrictions are made and the posterior edge contains the left-most
edge of the tongue during adjacent vowel constrictions. The size of the region was defined such
that a portion of the tongue body is always present within the region, based on observation of TT
gestures across multiple files. Change in average pixel intensity was used to track TT kinematics
(??), such that higher average pixel intensity is indicative of greater constriction, i.e. TT raising.
For all speakers, excluding Sk5 and Spk7, a single ROI was defined for each articulator across all
files. Two regions were used for Speaker 5 and Speaker 7 due to head re-positioning mid-study
requiring new regions be defined.
All velum and TT ROIs were defined using a publicly available Matlab toolbox2. The resulting
timeseries from the velum ROI were smoothed using LOESS, with a span of 30 data points, while for
the TT ROI timeseries locally-weighted linear regression was used (H = 0:05). From 1D timeseries
for each ROI, gestural landmarks were defined using a custom Python script based on the findgest
algorithm described in (Tiede, 2010). The relevant TT and velum gestures for each target phrase
were selected automatically within each file using phrase-level alignments from TextGrids. First-
pass alignments were automatically generated using the Montreal Forced Aligner (McAulie et al.,
2017) and corrected by hand.
Movement onset (GONS) was defined to be the point at which velocity reached 20% of its first
maximum velocity (PVEL) for the movement towards the target. Target (NONS) was identified as
the time-point after maximum velocity and before maximum extremum position at which velocity
fell below a 20% threshold of the first maximum velocity. The maximum displacement of the gesture
was defined at the velocity minimum closest to the movement's peak (MAXC). The target oset
(NOFFS) was calculated at the point following maximum displacement at which velocity increased
above the 20% threshold of the gesture's maximum velocity for the movement away from the target
(PVEL2) (Carignan et al., 2021; Oh et al., 2024). Movement oset (GOFFS) is then the point at
which velocity reaches 20% of this second maximum velocity when moving away from the target.1Younger speakers have larger adenoid glands, which tend to protrude beyond the edge of the pharyngeal wall.
Inclusion of large portions of the adenoid glands obfuscated the variation in velum action captured by PC1.2https://github.com/reedblaylock/VocalTract-ROI-Toolbox
8

===== PAGE 9 (obj 25) =====
An example of this can be seen in Figure 5 showing the example target phrase \bow no" with the
corresponding spectrogram (top) and velum (middle) and TT (bottom) pixel intensity timeseries
with indicated gestural landmarks.Figure 4: Example ROIs for the TT and Velum for spk8. The TT region tracks movement using
average pixel intensity, while the velum region uses centroid tracking.
2.5 Measurements
The dependent variables calculated from the gestural landmarks can be found in Table 3, grouped
by their relevance to timing, magnitude, and duration.
2.6 Statistics
For each variable, a number of statistical models were fit on the resulting data. To test overall eects
of certain factors for each variable, linear-mixed models were fit using the lmer package in R. These
models included fixed eects of syllable position, age, and frame, with interactions between age
and syllable position, and random speaker eects and random speaker slopes. The primary focus is
on fixed eects for the interaction between syllable position and age, as we predict developmental
dierences in the dependent variables as a function of the syllable position of the target nasals.
Main eects from ANOVAs performed on the linear models using the car package are also reported
when relevant. To test the dierence between syllable positions within speaker, pairwise Wilcoxon
tests were performed on all pairwise comparisons, e.g. onset versus coda. Following Shaw et al.
(2021) and Oh et al. (2024), we use linear regression to investigate the stability of timing patterns
as a function of variation in velum magnitude and duration. To control for collinearity between
velum magnitude and duration in these models, we compute partial correlations using the residuals
from linear regressions predicting magnitude and onset lag from duration. All statistical analysis
was done on the raw values without normalizing. This follows from the values for each variable
falling roughly on the same scale across speakers and this allows for interpreting model coecients
with respect to meaningful real-world values. Full statistical results are reported in the Appendix.
3 Results
3.1 Timing
To provide a sense of the distributions for onset lag across syllable positions, Figure 6 shows per
speaker density plots for this variable, ordered by age. Negative lag here indicates early velum
9

===== PAGE 10 (obj 36) =====
Figure 5: Example spectrogram (top) and TT (middle) and velum (bottom) timeseries from the
ROI analysis with gestural landmarks indicated.
10

===== PAGE 11 (obj 83) =====
MeasureTiming (ms) onset lag Velum ONS - TT ONS
tt phaseTT ONS - Velum ONSVelum DurationMagnitude MAXC - ONSDuration (ms) OFFS - ONS
Table 3: Dependent variables used in the current study grouped by timing, displacement and
duration.
lowering, while zero is indicative of sychrony between the velum and TT. A number of observations
can be made here. First, the two oldest speakers, age 15, exhibit clear bimodal distributions that
follow previous results from adults. Onset nasals tend to involve near synchrony between the
timing of the velum and TT, while coda and geminate nasals tend to have early velum lowering.
For all other speakers, there is a clear lack of bimodality in the distrbiutions, with early velum
lowering being prevalent in all syllable conditions. The mixed model shows a significant interaction
between onset lag and age for nasals in onset position (fi = 15:2; p < 0:001), suggesting as speakers
get older onset lag moves closer to zero. There is also a significant eect of the labial frame
(fi = 34:8; p < 0:001), indicating more synchronous timing in this frame than the alveolar frame.Figure 6: Density plots for onset lag compared across nasal syllable position with one plot per
speaker. Speakers are arranged from top left to bottom right by age. Red stars indicate significant
results from per-speaker pairwise Wilcoxon tests on syllable position comparisons.
While the results from onset lag indicate that the younger speakers employ early velum lowering
regardless of the syllable position of the nasal, this variable does not reveal when these speakers
time the onset of the TT relative to the velum gesture. To investigate this, we quantify at what
relative point during the velum gesture interval that the TT gesture begins, termed here as TT
phase. Per speaker density plots for this variable are shown in Figure 7. As a reference point,
we also include the average relative time point for all of the velum gestural landmarks. As with
onset lag, the two oldest speakers exhibit a more bimodal pattern where TT phase in onset nasals
diverges from the other two conditions, with the TT being initiated closer to the onset of the velum
gesture. The younger speakers all have largely unimodal distributions centered close to the time
the velum reached peak velocity or its target. While the reference points are based on averages,
the results here still suggest that the younger speakers wait until the velum is at or near its target
11

===== PAGE 12 (obj 89) =====
before initiating the TT gesture.Figure 7: Density plots of the TT phase variable as compared across nasal syllable position with
one plot per speaker. Speakers are arranged from top left to bottom right by age. The x-axis is
relative time within the velum gesture duration and horizontal lines show average relative gestural
landmark position for the velum.
3.2 Magnitude
Per speaker boxplots for velum magnitude are shown in Figure 8. As with onset lag, the two oldest
speakers exhibit a clear distinction between onset nasals and both coda and geminate nasals, with
onset nasals having significantly less velum magnitude. Interestingly, coda nasals also show much
greater velum magnitude than geminates for these two speakers, likely attributable to coda eects.
Some younger speakers produce greater velum magnitude in geminates than onsets, e.g. spk14
and spk11a and to a lesser extent in spk5 and spk8, though none of these speakers demonstrate the
expected adult onset-coda distinction along this dimension. Results from the mixed model for velum
magnitude show a significant interaction between age and onset position ((fi =  0:08; p < 0:05)),
indicating less velum magnitude in onset nasals as one gets older. There was also a significant
fixed eect of the labial frame (fi = 0:22; p < 0:001), suggesting greater velum magnitude when
producing nasals in this frame. In the alveolar frame, the TT likely maintains a more raised position
in anticipation of the upcoming nasal, resulting in greater change in TT position than in the labial
frame condition.
3.3 Duration
Per-speaker boxplots for velum duration are shown in Figure 10. As with onset lag and velum
magnitude, the two oldest speakers exhibit the expected adult pattern in that onset nasals have
siginificantly shorter velum gestures than coda and geminate nasals. Two of the younger speakers,
spk8 and spk14, produce longer velum gestures in geminates than onsets and codas. Surprisingly,
spk11a displays shorter velum gestures in codas than the other two syllable positions. Other
speakers have fairly uniform velum gesture durations across syllable positions. Results from the
mixed model show a significant interaction between age and onset position (fi =  32:7; p < 0:001),
indicating shorter velum gestures in onset nasals as one ages. The fixed eect of the labial frame was
also significant (fi =  22:1; p < 0:01), suggestive of shorter velum gestures in this frame condition.
12

===== PAGE 13 (obj 93) =====
Figure 8: Per speaker box plots for velum displacement across syllable positions. Red stars indicate
significant results from per-speaker pairwise Wilcoxon tests on syllable position comparisons.
The results for TT duration are shown in Figure 11. There is a general trend across speakers
that geminate nasals have longer TT durations than both onsets and codas, though there is no
dierence between onset and coda nasals.
3.4 Timing stability
To investigate the stability of timing relationships between the velum and TT, we fit per-speaker
linear regressions between timing variables and velum magnitude and duration. Significant corre-
lations between the timing and magnitude or duration indicate a lack of stability, while absence of
a correlation is suggestive of the timing relationship being stable for that speaker. In addition to
onset lag, we also include velum target to TT onset lag (velum NONS - TT GONS, referred to as
target-onset lag hereon), given that the results from TT phase showed that speakers tend to initiate
the TT near the time the velum achieves its target. We also fit linear mixed models predicting each
timing variable given velum magnitude and duration and their interaction with age (a three-way
interaction).
As stated above, these regressions involve partial correlations to control for collinearity between
velum magnitude and duration. To confirm this, we fit linear regressions predicting magnitude
from duration for both the velum and TT. Figure 12 shows the results for this per-speaker. As
suspected, a majority of speaker demonstrate a significant correlation between velum magnitude an
duration. The same results for the TT are shown in Figure 13. All speakers except spk15b show a
significant correlation between TT magnitude and duration. While these relationships are not fully
consistent across speakers, controlling for this collinearity allows for consistency in our statistical
models.
Figures 14 and 15 partial correlations between onset lag and velum magnitude and duration
respectively. Noticeably, all speakers exhibit a significant correlation between onset lag and either
velum magnitude or duration. While all speakers show this correlation for velum duration, a few
speakers do not for velum magnitude. This consistency is highly indicative of a lack of stability
13

===== PAGE 14 (obj 97) =====
Figure 9: Per speaker box plots for TT magnitude across syllable positions. Red stars indicate
significant results from per-speaker pairwise Wilcoxon tests on syllable position comparisons.
in this timing variable. The negative correlations across both variable point towards earlier velum
lowering being accompanied by greater velum magnitude and longer velum gestures. The mixed
model for onset lag shows main eects of velum duration (F(1, 374.49) = 11.6, p < 0:001), velum
magnitude (F(1, 372.5) = 8.5, p < 0:01), the interaction between velum magnitude and duration
(F(1, 376.3) = 5.2, p < 0:05), and frame (F(1, 374.98) = 55.3, p < 0:001). Age and interactions
with age were not found to be significant.
Results from partial correlations between target-onset lag and velum magnitude and duration
are shown in Figures 16 and 17 respectively. Note that negative target-onset lag indicates the
velum target is achieved before the TT onset, while positive values mean the TT onset occurs first.
With the exception of the two youngest speakers, spk5 and spk8, there is a clear trend across the
older speakers that no significant correlations are found across the two sets of correlations. Spk5
shows significant correlations for both comparisons, while spk8 has a significant correlation in the
duration comparison only. Compared to the results from onset lag, the target-onset relationship
is much more stable across speakers. This closely mirrors results from Korean adults (Oh, 2021),
though it has not been previously reported for English. The mixed model for target-onset lag shows
significant main eects of velum duration (F(1, 374.58) = 19.78, p < :001), age (F(1, 122.59) = 5.03,
p = .027), and frame (F(1, 372.59) = 39.48, p < :001). In addition, there are significant interactions
between velum magnitude and duration (F(1, 374.05) = 9.67, p = .002), age and velum duration
(F(1, 374.67) = 13.95, p < :001), and a significant three-way interaction between velum magnitude,
duration, and age (F(1, 373.77) = 7.10, p = .008). Crucially, age and its interactions were not found
to be significant in the model for onset lag, while both age and all of its interactions were significant
in the target-onset lag model. We take this as evidence that, as suggested in the correlation plots,
there are no developmental dierences in the stability of onset lag, while for target-onset lag there
are significant dierences, with some younger speakers showing a lack of stability in this variable.
14

===== PAGE 15 (obj 101) =====
Figure 10: Per speaker box plots for velum gesture duration across syllable positions. Red stars
indicate significant results from per-speaker pairwise Wilcoxon tests on syllable position compar-
isons.
4 Discussion
To recapitulate, the results showed that the two oldest speakers, age 15, essentially replicate the
velum coordination patterns previously reported for adults. Both speakers exhibit near synchronous
timing of the velum and TT gestures in onset nasals and produce early velum lowering in coda and
geminate nasals. These speakers also modulate velum gesture duration and magnitude depending
on syllable position, with onset nasals having lesser velum magnitude and shorter velum gestures
than coda and geminate nasals. The younger speakers, ages 5-14, all employ early velum lowering,
regardless of the syllable position of the nasal, and do not consistently make distinctions between
onset and coda nasals in terms of velum magnitude and duration. For timing stability, across
speakers it was found that velum target to TT onset lag was more stable than onset lag as a function
of varying velum magnitude and duration. Some younger speakers, especially spk5, however, did
not consistently display stability in either timing variable.
For timing, it was predicated that younger speakers will display a uniform timing strategy in
velum coordination. This prediction was borne out as all speakers ages 5-14 exhibited largely
unimodal distributions in onset lag and in the phasing of the TT. Regarding the timing strategy
itself, we acknowledged two competing hypotheses, early velum lowering or synchronous timing,
each with their own motivation. The results support the early velum lowering hypothesis as all
younger speakers exhibited this strategy across all nasal syllable positions. This finding is in line
with previous work showing that children have as much as or more anticipatory nasalization than
adults (Flege, 1988; Leeper et al., 1998; Ha and Kuehn, 2006), given that this assumes early velum
lowering. The synchronous timing hypothesis stemmed from work within the coupled oscillator
framework that has proposed that in-phase or synchronous timing is more stable than anti-phase or
asychronous timing and that in-phase coupling is more readily available to the child learner due to
the frequency of CV syllables in early speech (Goldstein et al., 2006; Nam et al., 2009). Although
the current study only focused on nasals, it nonetheless suggests that this reasoning does not extend
15

===== PAGE 16 (obj 105) =====
Figure 11: Per speaker box plots for TT gesture duration across syllable positions. Red stars indicate
significant results from per-speaker pairwise Wilcoxon tests on syllable position comparisons.Figure 12: Per-speaker correlation graphs for velum displacement and duration with results from
linear regression.
to the development of articulatory timing in complex segments.
The early velum lowering strategy is consistent with the view that velum lowering is likely more
readily available to the child learner and to lower the velum early is easier than maintaining velum
closure, which requires constant activation of the levator levi palatini, and timing its lowering to
coincide with the TT raising gesture. Early infant vocalizations commonly feature velum lowering
16

===== PAGE 17 (obj 111) =====
Figure 13: Per-speaker correlation graphs for TT displacement and duration with results from linear
regression.Figure 14: Per-speaker correlation graphs for onset lag and velum displacement with results from
linear regression when controlling for duration.
and a lowered velum is the default state at rest (Zajac, 2015). The child must learn to raise the
velum and maintain this closure during oral segments, an action that may be further complicated by
growth and reduction of the adenoids between the ages of 4-15 (Zajac, 2015; Perry et al., 2017). This
can be reframed as development in velum coordination entails learning to inhibit velum lowering
in onset nasals and timing this event to closely coincide with the oral constriction. Although this
explanation is largely a biomechanical one, language-specific phonology also plays a role here. We
do not expect the same degree of velum lowering in similar contexts in languages that contrast
oral and nasal vowels, e.g. French. To nasalize preceding vowels in English does not endanger any
phonological contrasts, while in French it would. We speculate then that in a language such as
French that children still lower the velum earlier than adults, but that velum lowering for nasal
consonants is distinct in timing from that for nasal vowels. Children likely maintain this distinction
17

===== PAGE 18 (obj 117) =====
Figure 15: Per-speaker correlation graphs for onset lag and velum gesture duration with results
from linear regression when controlling for displacement.Figure 16: Per-speaker correlation graphs for velum target to TT onset lag and velum displacement
with results from linear regression when controlling for duration.
from an early age, but velum lowering for nasal consonants is still earlier than it is in adults.
This explanation for early velum lowering also does not necessarily apply to the development
of articulatory timing in other complex segments, though it is compatible with the explanation
by Howson and Redford (2021) for the acquisition of articulatory timing in liquids. The authors
postulate that tongue body constrictions for vowels are well-formed and readily available to the
child learner and thus to form an early tongue body constriction in onset liquids is easier than
inhibiting this action and timing it near synchronously with the oral constriction. Concretely,
children prefer articulatory postures that are familiar, i.e. vowel-like tongue body constrictions and
a lowered velum state, and are biased towards these familiar states or actions when they useful.
This could also be framed as articulatory reuse, in that there is a preference to reuse articulatory
primitives (Faytak, 2018), such as velum lowering or tongue body retraction, as an ecient meaning
18

===== PAGE 19 (obj 123) =====
Figure 17: Per-speaker correlation graphs for velum target to TT onset lag and velum gesture
duration with results from linear regression when controlling for displacement.
of achieving multiple constrictions for complex segments. Learning to inhibit the reused gesture then
forms a critical component in the development of articulatory coordination in complex segments.
Investigation into the stability of timing between the velum and TT showed that, while all
speakers displayed some variation in onset lag as a function of variation in velum magnitude or
duration, many speakers consistently did not show this variation in the lag between velum target
achievement and TT onset. This closely mirrors the results from Korean adults (Oh, 2021). As
was suggested for Korean, we take these results to mean that the velum target to TT onset timing
is encoded in the cognitive representations for nasals in American English. There was also the
question of whether or not younger speakers are even coordinating the velum and the TT at all.
Although speakers could exhibit a lack of distinction in velum-TT timing due to changes in syllable
position, we suggested that stability in this timing relationship along some dimension could still
indicate that there is in fact coordination between the two gestures. This can be seen clearly for
spk11a and spk14, who both produce a fairly uniform timing strategy across syllable positions, but
show stability in the velum target to TT onset lag when there is variation in velum magnitude
and duration. The same cannot be said for spk5, spk8, and spk11b, who exhibit a lack of stability
in both onset lag and velum target to TT onset lag, while also producing uniformly early velum
lowering. This may suggests these speakers have yet to learn to coordinate the velum and TT.
Although the results from timing display developmental stages of unimodal to bimodal timing
patterns, there is a clear lack of developmental progression from one stage to the other. All speakers
aged 5-14 show fairly uniform distributions and then the two oldest speakers suddenly exhibit clear
bimodality.
One potential confound for the lack of distinction in younger speakers between onset and coda
nasals along the dimensions investigated here is that perhaps these speakers just simply aren't
making any distinction among the dierent target phrases within the labial/coronal frames. That
is, they aren't distinguishing \bow no" and \bone oh", but are rather producing a single disyllabic
sequence across both sets of tokens. None of the other results, e.g. TT duration or magnitude,
suggest a distinction between the onset and coda positions. To investigate this, we looked at the
duration of the vowels in the target phrases, results for which are in Figure 18. The results indicate
that for nearly all speakers the vowel in the second syllable is much longer in the coda condition
than in the onset condition. This dierence is significant for all speakers except spk8, though this
distinction is still evident for this speaker. This findings makes sense given that the V2 in the coda
condition appears in isolation. This provides evidence that, while the younger speakers are not
making timing, magnitude, or duration distinctions in velum coordination dependent on varying
19

===== PAGE 20 (obj 127) =====
syllable positions, they are still actually producing distinct utterances across the onset and coda
conditions.Figure 18: Per speaker box plots for vowel duration across syllable positions, where V1 and V2
indicate the vowel in the first and second syllable respectively. Red stars indicate significant results
from per-speaker pairwise Wilcoxon tests on syllable position comparisons.
Various extension of the current study are feasible. First, the current study only investigated
American English, which itself has specific velum timing patterns. Replicating this study on other
languages with dierent velum timing patterns, e.g. Korean, French or German, is highly encour-
aged. Language-specific constraints on nasalization are naturally expected to impact developmental
patterns. For example, given that French contrasts oral and nasal vowels, while American English
does not, an early velum lowering strategy has dierent implications for French than it does Amer-
ican English. Cross-linguistic findings can also reveal aspects of the development of velum coor-
dination that are due to physiological factors, such as the reduction in size of the adenoid glands
potentially impacting velum closure. Second, the current study did not investigate coordination of
the velum and TT with either adjacent vowel. It has been proposed that in onset nasals the TT,
velum, and vowel are initiated sychronously (), while for coda nasals it is a bit unclear what is
expected (). For a simplex segment such as /t/, the vowel and TT are expected to be phased asy-
chronously, but when an additional gesture is present, as in nasals, how such an additional gesture
is timed with respect to the vowel is largely unknown.
There are a number of limitatons to the current study. First, the participants were all female,
which limits generalizing the results of the study to all children, especially given developmental
dierences between boys and girls (Smith and Zelaznik, 2004). Replicating the current study
with male subjects would allow for better generalizing the results to speech development more
broadly. If boys ages 5-14 also exhibit the patterns shown here with respect to timing, magnitude,
and duration of the velum, it would be more suggestive of these patterns being typical in the
development of American English nasals. Second, the sample size here is relatively small, also
limiting generalizability, especially given that developmental trajectories can vary highly across
people (Nittrouer, 1993). As noted above, there is a clear lack of progression from the unimodal
timing patterns in the younger subjects to the bimodal patterns of the two oldest speakers. Whether
or not this actually reects the typical developmental trajectory of velum timing or is due to the
small sample size can only be determined by replicating this study on more subjects. Lastly, the
current study only included nasals in the low vowel context. Although this was intentional, it
does not allow us to account for potential velum lowering eects intrinsic to the vowels themselves
(Bell-Berti and Krakow, 1991). It has been established that low vowels have more velum lowering
than high vowels (Bell-Berti, 1993; Zajac, 2015) and, as discussed above, we cannot rule out the
20

===== PAGE 21 (obj 131) =====
role of these eects in biasing the younger subjects towards early velum lowering.
5 Conclusion
References
Abakarova, D., Fuchs, S., and Noiray, A. (2022). Developmental Changes in Coarticulation Degree
Relate to Dierences in Articulatory Patterns: An Empirically Grounded Modeling Approach.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 65(9):3276{3299.
Bell-Berti, F. (1993). Understanding velic motor control: studies of segmental context. In Nasals,
nasalization, and the velum, pages 63{85. Elsevier.
Bell-Berti, F. and Krakow, R. A. (1991). Anticipatory velar lowering: A coproduction account. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 90(1):112{123.
Blaylock, R., Goldstein, L., and Narayanan, S. S. (2016). Velum Control for Oral Sounds. In
INTERSPEECH, pages 1084{1088.
Byrd, D. (1996). Inuences on articulatory timing in consonant sequences. Journal of Phonetics,
24(2):209{244.
Byrd, D., Tobin, S., Bresch, E., and Narayanan, S. (2009). Timing eects of syllable structure and
stress on nasals: A real-time MRI examination. Journal of Phonetics, 37(1):97{110.
Carignan, C., Coretta, S., Frahm, J., Harrington, J., Hoole, P., Joseph, A., Kunay, E., and Voit, D.
(2021). Planting the seed for sound change: Evidence from real-time MRI of velum kinematics
in German. Language, 97(2):333{364.
Cychosz, M., Munson, B., and Edwards, J. R. (2021). Practice and experience predict coarticulation
in child speech. Language learning and development, 17(4):366{396.
Faytak, M. D. (2018). Articulatory uniformity through articulatory reuse: insights from an ultra-
sound study of Suzhou Chinese. University of California, Berkeley.
Flege, J. E. (1988). Anticipatory and carry-over nasal coarticulation in the speech of children and
adults. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 31(4):525{536.
Goldstein, L., Byrd, D., and Saltzman, E. (2006). The role of vocal tract gestural action units
in understanding the evolution of phonology. Action to language via the mirror neuron system,
pages 215{249.
Green, J. R., Moore, C. A., Higashikawa, M., and Steeve, R. W. (2000). The physiologic devel-
opment of speech motor control: Lip and jaw coordination. Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 43(1):239{255.
Green, J. R. and Nip, I. S. B. (2010). Some organization principles in early speech development.
In Maassen, B. and van Lieshout, P., editors, Speech Motor Control: New developments in basic
and applied research, page 0. Oxford University Press.
Ha, S. and Kuehn, D. (2006). Temporal characteristics of nasalization in children and adult speakers
of American English and Korean during production of three vowel contextsa). The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 120(3):1622{1630.
Ha, S., Sim, H., Zhi, M., and Kuehn, D. P. (2004). An acoustic study of the temporal characteristics
of nasalization in children with and without cleft palate. The Cleft palate-craniofacial journal,
41(5):535{543.
Henderson, J. B. (1984). VELOPHARYNGEAL FUNCTION IN ORAL AND NASAL VOWELS:
A CROSS-LANGUAGE STUDY (VELUM). University of Connecticut.
21

===== PAGE 22 (obj 133) =====
Howson, P. J. and Redford, M. A. (2021). The acquisition of articulatory timing for liquids:
Evidence from child and adult speech. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
64(3):734{753.
Kent, R. D. (1983). The segmental organization of speech. In The production of speech, pages
57{89. Springer.
Krakow, R. A. (1989). The articulatory organization of syllables: A kinematic analysis of labial
and velar gestures. Yale University.
Krakow, R. A. (1999). Physiological organization of syllables: a review. Journal of Phonetics,
27(1):23{54.
Kumar, P., Tian, Y., Lim, Y., Cui, S. X., Hagedorn, C., Byrd, D., Sinha, U. K., Narayanan, S.,
and Nayak, K. S. (2024). State-of-the-art speech production MRI protocol for new 0.55 Tesla
scanners. In Interspeech 2024, pages 2590{2594.
Lammert, A. C., Proctor, M. I., Narayanan, S. S., and others (2010). Data-driven analysis of
realtime vocal tract MRI using correlated image regions. In Interspeech, pages 1572{1575.
Leeper, H. A., Tissington, M. L., and Munhall, K. G. (1998). Temporal Characteristics of Velopha-
ryngeal Function in Children. The Cleft Palate Craniofacial Journal, 35(3):215{221.
Lin, S. and Demuth, K. (2015). Children's acquisition of English onset and coda/l: Articulatory
evidence. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 58(1):13{27.
Lu, Y., Wiltshire, C. E., Watkins, K. E., Chiew, M., and Goldstein, L. (2022). Characteristics
of articulatory gestures in stuttered speech: A case study using real-time magnetic resonance
imaging. Journal of Communication Disorders, 97:106213.
McAulie, M., Socolof, M., Mihuc, S., Wagner, M., and Sonderegger, M. (2017). Montreal forced
aligner: Trainable text-speech alignment using kaldi. In Interspeech, volume 2017, pages 498{502.
McGowan, R. S., Nittrouer, S., and Manning, C. J. (2004). Development of [] in young, Midwestern,
American children. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 115(2):871{884.
Mu~noz, F., Lim, Y., Cui, S. X., Stark, H., and Nayak, K. S. (2023). Evaluation of a novel 8-channel
RX coil for speech production MRI at 0.55 T. Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Biology
and Medicine, 36(3):419{426.
Nam, H., Goldstein, L., and Saltzman, E. (2009). Self-organization of syllable structure: A coupled
oscillator model. Approaches to phonological complexity, 16:299{328.
Nittrouer, S. (1993). The emergence of mature gestural patterns is not uniform: Evidence from an
acoustic study. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 36(5):959{972.
Noiray, A., Menard, L., and Iskarous, K. (2013). The development of motor synergies in chil-
dren: Ultrasound and acoustic measurements. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
133(1):444{452.
Oh, M. (2021). Articulatory dynamics and stability in multi-gesture complexes. PhD Thesis, Uni-
versity of Southern California.
Oh, M., Byrd, D., Goldstein, L., and Narayanan, S. S. (2024). Vertical larynx actions and interges-
tural timing stability in Hausa ejectives and implosives. Phonetica, 81(6):559{597.
Oh, M., Byrd, D., and Narayanan, S. S. (2021). Leveraging real-time MRI for illuminating linguistic
velum action. In Interspeech.
Perry, J. L., Kuehn, D. P., Sutton, B. P., and Fang, X. (2017). Velopharyngeal Structural and Func-
tional Assessment of Speech in Young Children Using Dynamic Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
The Cleft Palate Craniofacial Journal, 54(4):408{422.
22

===== PAGE 23 (obj 135) =====
Proctor, M., Lu, L. H., Zhu, Y., Goldstein, L., Narayanan, S., and others (2012). Articulation of
Mandarin Sibilants: a multi-plane realtime MRI study. Proc. Speech Sci. Tech, pages 113{116.
Proctor, M. I., Lammert, A. C., Katsamanis, A., Goldstein, L. M., Hagedorn, C., Narayanan,
S. S., and others (2011). Direct Estimation of Articulatory Kinematics from Real-Time Magnetic
Resonance Image Sequences. In Interspeech, pages 281{284.
Rubertus, E. and Noiray, A. (2018). On the development of gestural organization: A cross-sectional
study of vowel-to-vowel anticipatory coarticulation. PloS one, 13(9):e0203562.
Shaw, J. A., Oh, S., Durvasula, K., and Kochetov, A. (2021). Articulatory coordination distin-
guishes complex segments from segment sequences. Phonology, 38(3):437{477.
Smith, A. and Zelaznik, H. N. (2004). Development of functional synergies for speech motor
coordination in childhood and adolescence. Developmental psychobiology, 45(1):22{33.
Terband, H., Maassen, B., Van Lieshout, P., and Nijland, L. (2011). Stability and composition
of functional synergies for speech movements in children with developmental speech disorders.
Journal of communication disorders, 44(1):59{74.
Tiede, M. (2010). MVIEW: Multi-channel visualization application for displaying dynamic sensor
movements. development.
Zajac, D. J. (2015). Velopharyngeal Function in Speech Production: Some Developmental and
Structural Considerations. The handbook of speech production, pages 109{130.
Appendix
A: Results from statistical tests
Table 4: Fixed-eect coecients for the model comparing onset lag across syllable position, age,
frame. Formula: lagonset  condition * age + frame + (1 + condition j speaker)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) -297.403 29.782 6.185 -9.986 4.83e-05
condition:coda 44.995 47.185 5.426 0.954 0.38083
condition:geminate -17.294 28.257 15.886 -0.612 0.54917
age 15.236 2.478 5.781 6.148 0.00098
frame:labial 34.786 5.581 370.378 6.233 1.24e-09
condition:coda:age -6.737 3.971 5.304 -1.697 0.14719
condition:geminate:age -1.821 2.327 14.290 -0.783 0.44646Table 5: Fixed-eect coecients for the model comparing TT phase across syllable position, age,
frame. Formula: TT phase  condition * age + frame + (1 + condition j speaker)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 0.433143 0.093113 5.295 4.652 0.00482
condition:coda -0.097176 0.142864 5.170 -0.680 0.52564
condition:geminate -0.010571 0.075514 10.061 -0.140 0.89143
age -0.018412 0.007828 5.152 -2.352 0.06388
frame:labial -0.022247 0.014735 390.193 -1.510 0.13189
condition:coda:age 0.010992 0.012066 5.124 0.911 0.40311
condition:geminate:age 0.005488 0.006318 9.608 0.869 0.4062423

===== PAGE 24 (obj 137) =====
Table 6: Fixed-eect coecients for the model comparing velum displacement across syllable posi-
tion, age, frame. Formula: displacement  condition * age + frame + (1 + condition j speaker)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 2.86806 0.36789 5.517 7.796 0.000352
condition:coda -0.50913 0.48520 5.289 -1.049 0.339586
condition:geminate -0.04327 0.28957 5.516 -0.149 0.886526
age -0.08091 0.03078 5.268 -2.629 0.044288
frame:labial 0.22426 0.05710 363.570 3.927 0.000103
condition:coda:age 0.08115 0.04084 5.174 1.987 0.101742
condition:geminate:age 0.03254 0.02383 4.971 1.365 0.230692Table 7: Fixed-eect coecients for the model comparing TT magnitude across syllable position,
age, frame. Formula: TT magnitude  condition * age + frame + (1 + condition j speaker)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 2.06301 0.40847 5.252 5.051 0.00342
condition:coda -0.19010 0.25251 5.390 -0.753 0.48311
condition:geminate -0.07592 0.19252 21.468 -0.394 0.69720
age -0.02104 0.03442 5.160 -0.611 0.56696
frame:labial 0.23653 0.03912 369.778 6.046 3.62e-09
condition:coda:age -0.02691 0.02117 5.183 -1.271 0.25766
condition:geminate:age 0.01932 0.01582 19.229 1.221 0.23681Table 8: Fixed-eect coecients for the model comparing velum gesture duration across syllable
position, age, and frame. Formula: durvelum  condition * age + frame + (1 + condition j
speaker)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 850.242 44.057 5.244 19.298 4.51e-06
condition:coda -98.614 67.941 5.452 -1.451 0.20166
condition:geminate -11.254 44.793 9.845 -0.251 0.80680
age -32.696 3.668 4.913 -8.913 0.000324
frame:labial -22.137 8.095 369.333 -2.735 0.006546
condition:coda:age 10.106 5.718 5.328 1.767 0.13379
condition:geminate:age 6.498 3.704 9.006 1.754 0.11323Table 9: Fixed-eect coecients for the model comparing TT gesture duration across syllable
position, age, and frame. Formula: durTT  condition * age + frame + (1 + condition j speaker)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 411.641 21.589 6.810 19.067 3.66e-07
condition:coda -44.223 21.061 14.858 -2.100 0.05326
condition:geminate 18.608 19.892 240.042 0.935 0.35049
age -9.404 1.793 6.314 -5.246 0.00165
frame:labial 45.098 4.288 374.147 10.518 <2e-16
condition:coda:age 3.268 1.753 13.882 1.864 0.08357
condition:geminate:age 1.367 1.629 227.864 0.840 0.4020524

===== PAGE 25 (obj 139) =====
Table 10: Fixed-eect coecients for the model predicting onset lag: lagonset  magvelum * age
* durvelum + frame + (1 | spklabel)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 316.100 131.000 332.322 2.412 0.016401
magvelum -151.200 52.010 372.500 -2.908 0.003861
age -10.450 9.948 318.600 -1.051 0.294247
durvelum -0.7193 0.2109 374.500 -3.411 0.000717
frame:labial 32.800 4.412 375.000 7.435 7.17e-13
magvelum:age 7.248 4.058 374.200 1.786 0.074915
magvelum:durvelum 0.1892 0.0826 376.300 2.290 0.022576
age:durvelum 0.01300 0.01723 374.000 0.755 0.450906
magvelum:age:durvelum -0.009457 0.007034 376.800 -1.344 0.179627Table 11: Type III ANOVA (Satterthwaite) for the model: lagonset  magvelum * age * durvelum
+ frame + (1 | spklabel)Eect Sum Sq Mean Sq NumDF DenDF F value p valuemagvelum 14198 14198 1 372.50 8.4539 0.0038606
age 1854 1854 1 318.57 1.1037 0.2942466
durvelum 19542 19542 1 374.49 11.6360 0.0007174
frame 92835 92835 1 374.98 55.2775 7.174e-13
magvelum:age 5357 5357 1 374.20 3.1897 0.0749152
magvelum:durvelum 8807 8807 1 376.30 5.2439 0.0225764
age:durvelum 957 957 1 374.02 0.5696 0.4509059
magvelum:age:durvelum 3035 3035 1 376.82 1.8074 0.1796269Table 12: Fixed-eect coecients for the model predicting tarons lag: lagtarons  magvelum *
age * durvelum + frame + (1 | spklabel)Eect Estimate Std. Error df t value p value(Intercept) 463.773827 146.106017 157.715204 3.174 0.001807
magvelum -85.295657 54.450146 374.791069 -1.566 0.118078
age -25.239466 11.250832 122.586522 -2.243 0.026670
durvelum -0.980639 0.220490 374.581172 -4.448 1.15e-05
frame:labial 28.767703 4.578421 372.592324 6.283 9.26e-10
magvelum:age 5.554326 4.243580 374.540869 1.309 0.191378
magvelum:durvelum 0.268118 0.086206 374.047811 3.110 0.002013
age:durvelum 0.067294 0.018019 374.673098 3.735 0.000217
magvelum:age:durvelum -0.019542 0.007332 373.773839 -2.665 0.008028Table 13: Type III ANOVA (Satterthwaite) for the model: lagtarons  magvelum * age *
durvelum + frame + (1 | spklabel)Eect Sum Sq Mean Sq NumDF DenDF F value p valuemagvelum 4420 4420 1 374.79 2.4539 0.1180776
age 9064 9064 1 122.59 5.0326 0.0266705
durvelum 35628 35628 1 374.58 19.7806 1.146e-05
frame 71109 71109 1 372.59 39.4802 9.257e-10
magvelum:age 3086 3086 1 374.54 1.7132 0.1913784
magvelum:durvelum 17423 17423 1 374.05 9.6734 0.0020130
age:durvelum 25120 25120 1 374.67 13.9470 0.0002173
magvelum:age:durvelum 12794 12794 1 373.77 7.1033 0.008027725
